 1 The Return of Small Scales :  
Contemporary Social Movements, Radical Democracy and the Decentralising Political 
Imaginary  
[Draft Paper, January 2020, Do not quote]  
 
 
In 2019, several major social movements have invested what we will call here the local levels 
of politics. In France, the yellow jackets movement was characterized by an original form of 
mobilization, on roundabouts in peri -urban areas, where, in some cases, it developed 
popular assemblies and self -organized in a sustainable way. It is  one of the most 
decentralized social movements in French protest history in recent decades (Jeanpierre, 
2019). In Chile, the protest process that began in October 2019  along with its demand for 
the formation of an assembly to amend the Constitution inheri ted from Pinochet's time, has 
multiplied local assemblies in several parts of the country. In Hong Kong, since March 2019, 
some of the demonstrators against the Government amendment s to the extradition bill 
have been referring to what they call  "localism",  a nebulous group of political organisations 
that criticise China's central government, defend local identity and autonomy, and some of 
whose fringes want to deepen democracy.  
All these recent mobilizations can be associated with a series of protests that have emerged 
since the global financial crisis of 2008: Occupy movements in the United States; place -based 
movements of the early 2010s in North Africa, the Middle East, and southern Europe; 
mobilizations against large facilities  (airports, dams, high -speed trains, etc.)  on several 
continents, such as  the Zad de Notre -Dame -des-Landes in France and the No TAV  movement  
in Italy (Mauvaise Troupe Collective, 2018). In addition to these often  spectacular 
mobilisations, there is a growi ng set of low -noise mobilisations that develop from proximity. 
They concern  the ecological qualification of places , they are deployed in working -class 
neighbourhoods undergoing renovation, they fight against pollution, the closure of factories, 
hospitals a nd schools, in the face of nuclear power or major development projects (Le Bart, 
Lefebvre, 2005; Bony, 2011; Dechezelles, Olive, 2019). At the same time, territorialized 
engagement in intentional communities is also growing again in several Western countri es a 
few decades after the last great wave of "communes" in the 1970s (Lallement, 2019; Solnit, 
2009). Beyond their heterogeneity, in all these forms of protest, the criticism of 
representative institutions, and the demand for deeper, sometimes direct demo cracy (Sitrin, 
Azzellini, 2014) are associated, on the one hand, with a strong territorial anchoring, a 
resource for the struggle itself, and, on the other hand, with a predilection of the 
protagonists for the small scales of politics, what some call a “place consciousness”  (Dirlik, 
2011).  
Parallel to these developments, militant discourses and theoretical research are discovering, 
or rediscovering, the close, the place, the locality, the commune, the territory as potential 
radical political categories. The y draw on a whole heterogeneous intellectual tradition that 
has promoted small scales: Pierre -Joseph Proudhon, Pierre Kropotkine, Gandhi, Leopold 
Kohr, Ivan Illich, Ernst Friedrich Schumacher (the author of Small is Beautiful  in 1973), 
Kirkpatrick Sale or Murray Bookchin and many others. These discourses  also echo the rising 
environmental movements that have long promoted “local ” action. Some of them combine 
the theme of the "common s" with that of the "commune" and its political and even  2 economic autonomy. They evoke contemporary examples of territorial autonomy and 
radical democracy combined as in Rojava or Chiapas. Several of the proposals emanating 
from these discourses also combine, in their promotion of human -sized  scales, a radical 
democratic demand an d a critique of political verticality and centralism. “Right to the city ” 
or “right to the village ”, municipalist movement, more or less libertarian (Bookchin, 1995, 
2000), communalism (Colon, Herson -Ford, Horvath, Martindale, Porges, 2017), ecological 
com munities, eco -villages, bio -regionalism, etc : the diversity of forms of political 
organization and participation proposed by activists and theorists of this new decentralizing 
and democratic wave may be seen as  both a strength and a weakness. The fact rema ins that 
the current theoretical and militant conjuncture has converged to promote these small 
scales of politics as strategic levers in the social and ecological contestation of neoliberal 
capitalism.  
Although a significant part of the social movements th at have developed in several parts of 
the world in the last decade carry, in some of their fractions, th is new critical political 
imaginary , it is, of course, not exclusive of other repertoires of action and other hopes, in 
particular, of maintaining natio nal and transnational political ambitions. But the evolutionary 
idea of a progressive widening, over the long period of the last two centuries, of relevant 
protest scales or democratic transformations, from the local to the transnational via the 
national, should be  questioned. This idea may have been attractive after the fall of the 
Soviet bloc or the beginnings of a nti-globalis ation movements . The most visible 
transnational causes of protest in recent years, such as feminism or ecology, are in fact also 
being mobilized at the national and subnational levels of citizens’ engagement. Their rise 
does not call into question the idea that there exists  a trend towards the relocalisation of 
protest politics, complementary to transnationalist  activism, and a rise of a political 
imagina ry of the close, the small, where collective control of daily life is a determining issue.  
After having isolated some general features of these new territorial mobilizations, we will 
briefly examine the causes of  their current rise. Two trends in recent decades - political 
decentralization and the relative democratization of local arenas - seem to us to contribute, 
not mechanically, but indirectly  at least , to the new attractiveness of the small scales of 
politics . Through a mechanism that is not without suggesting that of “relative deprivation” , 
the opening up of local democratic opportunities may have  result ed in a new wave of citizen 
politicization : local democracy thus represents one of the front lines of conte mporary 
politics. A dynamic could therefore emerge in which participation and protest are mutually 
supportive rather than opposed. If such a dynamic is set in motion in the near future t he 
small scales of politics would not simply make a temporary return: they would permanently 
invest the political imagina ries of the current century.  
Characteristics and rationale for small -scale engagements  
Let us begin by isolating a few general features of what can be understood by “territorial 
social movements ” (Dechezel les, Olive, 2019).  
First, these mobilizations do not generally start from strong pre -constituted 
interests and identified political organizations.  
Second, the movement, and often certain places in the locality where it takes 
place, such as the roundabout  of the yellow vests  or the neighbourhood or city 
school, are their own vectors of politicization and collective learning.   3 So much so that, thirdly, these mobilizations are not only opposing the public 
authorities but also forces of political proposal: th ey imagine alternatives; they 
sometimes even design  some forms of collective inquiries ; they demonstrate a 
strong reflexivity about the methods, assets and limits of their struggle.  
The fourth feature of the territorial mobilizations that have been develo ping 
over the last few decades is that, as in the yellow vest movement in France, 
political affiliations or identifications are set back, minimized or silenced.  
Finally, the fifth and last generic feature characterizing these territorial 
mobilizations, as well as the yellow vests  movement, comes from the fact that 
their specific dynamics do not prevent links with other struggles and on other 
scales, beyond localiz ed spaces.  
To these five traits, we must obviously add the sometimes radical democratic aspiration that 
goes with the practice of horizontality and the criticism of political organizations and their 
representatives (Ortiz, Burke, Berrada, Cortes, 2013; Sit irin, Azellini, 2014). In the European 
square  or place -based  movement s, in the ZADs  in France, democratic aspirations, sometimes 
constitutional, are discussed collectively, assembly practices are regular and daily self -
organisation, the fact doing things  together, are structuring political dimensions.  
Admittedly, the formal resemblance between repertoires of action and places of protest 
from one country to another, from one moment to another, says nothing about the actual 
political significance of mobilisa tions that resort to this type of protest practices. But a new 
protest grammar , centred in places close to and different from that of trade unions on the 
one hand and civil disobedience movements on the other, seems to have circulate d in recent 
years betwe en distinct social groups, around diversified causes, and in several countries.  
In his classic study of protests in France over the last four centuries - from which he 
developed the very notion of a "repertoire of contention " - the American sociologist Cha rles 
Tilly showed, as we know, that a transition took place around 1848, from a mode of protest 
action that included hullabaloo practices, grain riots, field invasions, tax revolts, to new ways 
of protesting that placed strikes and demonstrations at the ce ntre (Tilly, 1986). He 
interpreted this change as the slow transition from a local and particular repertoire  of 
contention , also characterized by the use of grievances, supported by notables who were 
encouraged to intervene with the central public authorit ies, to a national repertoire of 
contention addressed more directly to the State and adaptable to different causes, to 
different protagonists, in different places.  
Some of Tilly's readers considered that a third type of collective action repertoire, situa ted at 
the supranational level and with a strong emphasis on  expertise and advocacy, had emerged 
in recent decades. Much of what has been called anti-globalisation movements  seemed to 
embody, beyond the spectacular counter -summit riots, this change in scal e and method of 
social movement politics. Twenty years after their beginnings, these forms of action and 
networking of political and social struggles seem to be  in crisis. In the long history of 
conte ntions , there is therefore no "natural" evolution of the  repertoires of action from the 
local to the transnational. The history of protest forms is made up of backtracking, 
coexistences, combinations (Voss, Williams, 2012). And the study of social movements has 
often been stat e-cent red, which has prevented it f rom taking into account the revival of 
grassroots and locally -based social movements at the beginning of the new millennium, such 
as that of the Brazilian landless workers or the Los Angeles Janitors (Ibid).   4 The current revival of a small -scale political i maginary and democratic practices must 
certainly also be linked to other contemporary historical trends such as the difficulties in 
politicising the world of labour  in many countries where trade unionism is weakened or the 
difficulties for anti -neoliberal left-wing coalitions or parties, and in particular for the 
advocates in Europe of "left -wing populism" to gain power. The local arena therefore appear 
as base s of support where  some of  the harmful effects of neo -liberalism can be addressed 
collectively. Without  being able to develop here all these negative determinations of th is re-
localisation of part of contemporary  contentions , another possible explanation of this 
phenomenon  will be put forward.  
Political decentralization and democratization of the local level  
Forms of return to the politics of small scales can indeed build on an earlier international 
trend of slow but steady political decentralization over the past two decades. Sub -national 
democracy changed context, at different rates in different parts of the world, from the mid -
1970s onwards.  In post -war Europe, what Colin Crouch called the "mid -century consensus" 
implied, in addition to Keynesian economic policies and state interventionism, a centralized, 
bureaucratic and homogenizing mode of government (Ladner et al., 2019; Loughlin, 
Hendrik s, Lidström, 2010: 2). In Central and Eastern Europe and Russia, the democratic 
transition of the 1990s was accompanied by the promotion of decentralization . Very many 
countries  now  have local authorities, with councils and assemblies elected by universal 
suffrage and an executive power that is accountable to the citizens. The approval by 
UNHABITAT of the Guidelines on Decentralization and the Strengthening of Local Authorities 
in April 2007 represents a step forward in the international recognition of dece ntralization. 
The competences and budgets of local authorities are increasing even though there are 
great differences in this empowerment process between countries (United Cities and Local 
Governments, 2008). The current situation of re -politici zation of t he local level by public 
authorities is the product of this situation and its aftermath.  
This decentralization is not in itself a guarantee of democratization, but local democracy has 
also made progress in recent decades (Teune, 1995; Andrew, Goldsmith, 1 998; Bacqué, Rey, 
Sintomer, 2005; Van Deth, Montero, Westholm, 2008). Admittedly, in the British Isles, 
despite the 2006 Local Government White Paper, forms of local participative or direct 
democracy do not seem to be widespread . They are more frequent, as  we know, in 
Germany, Austria and Switzerland. The state traditions of other European countries further 
south (France, Italy, Spain, Portugal) or north (Sweden, Norway, Denmark) make less use of 
participatory or deliberative mechanisms at local level, even  though certain regions or 
municipalities in each of these countries have embarked on participatory or deliberative 
experiments (Baldersheim, Stahlberg, 1994; Sintomer, 2007). Local referendums  in particular  
are at the initiative of leaders and are only co nsultative in many other Northern European 
countries as well as in Italy, Spain, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, etc. (Baldersheim, 
Stahlberg, 1994; Sintomer, 2007). In the countries of the former Soviet bloc, such as in 
Russia or Ukraine, several l egislative provisions have been put in place to promote direct 
democracy at the local level through popular initiatives, public hearings and general 
assemblies (Loughlin, Hendriks, Lidström, 2010: 120). In several of the countries in this area, 
such as Bul garia, Portugal, Poland, Greece and Lithuania, sub -municipal entities such as 
parishes, communities and neighbourhoods in large metropolises are recognized and host 
representative or participatory democratic institutions.   5 The variations  in local citizenshi p between continents are very large (United Cities and Local 
Governments, 2009). Latin America is undoubtedly the champion of legal provisions to 
promote local democratic participation: in Brazil since the 1988 Constitution (which provides 
for plebiscite, referendum, popular councils, popular initiative, participatory budget), in 
Bolivia (since the 1994 Ley de Participación Popular) and then, in the last decade and even 
though these developments are fragile and reversible, in Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru and 
other countries on the continent (192 -193). In Central America (Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El 
Salvador), the institution of the open municipal council ( cabildo abierto ) has developed. In 
the United States and Canada, while New England town meetings have survived  in very few 
places, citizens' commissions and local participatory mechanisms have continued to develop, 
even though their role is often only advisory, the councils of New York buroughs and San 
Antonio neighbourhoods being, among others, an exception (246) . Several countries (Ghana, 
Niger, Uganda, India, Pakistan, Philippines, etc.) have renewed the use of village councils to 
appeal to citizen opinion or to deliberate (295). Despite major international inequalities in 
the development of local citizenship, a t the global level, the two movements of 
decentralization of public authorities and local democratization have gained ground over the 
past two decades.  
Beneath the surface of the most visible political behaviours, institutions self -governed by the 
populat ion are also appearing, for example in some North American cities: In Olympia, 
Washington State, an assembly organizes tenants and the homeless; in Jackson, Mississippi, 
an assembly takes charge of ecologically and socially responsible production activitie s; in 
Oaxaca, Detroit, time banks, community gardens, block councils, mutual aid systems  have 
developed on vacant land (Feldman, Herson -Hord, 2019: 51 -52). When viewed through the 
lens of municipal democratisation the many place -based movements organising around 
different issues - Zagreb je NAŠ! fighting corruption, the Cynon Valley Party organising for 
their local community, Cambiamo Mes sina dal Basso mobilising around refugee support, the 
Polish Urban Movements Congress fixing issues of daily life, and Barcelona en Comú working 
for fair housing, among many others - can be seen to share much in common.  
Some  analysts even  see many current  social struggles as involving confrontation between 
local communities and giant transnational corporations over fiscal policy, policing, and 
control of resources: struggles over CO2 -emitting industries in South Dakota, Northern 
California, and British Col umbia; struggles for control of water in Bolivia, Nigeria, Pittsburgh, 
or Flint, Michigan; reappropriation of public goods by local communities (Manski, Smith, 
2019). Local communities are not only challenging the power of large corporations but also 
the s overeignty of central and state authorities. In the United States, several cities are  even  
calling for the restoration of the home rule  in order to regulate elections, raise the minimum 
wage, have higher ecological standards, preserve public health and con trol energy supply 
(10).  
The dialectic of local participation and protest  
Despite all these initiatives, the limits of the dual process of decentralization and local 
democratization of the last two decades remain numerous. Empirical inquiries  of the citize n 
participation devices  that have developed at the local level confirm that these have, for the 
time being, limited scope (Gourgues, 2013; Talpin, 2013). These mechanisms affect a small 
part of the population, which is most often already interested in poli tics when it is not 
mobilized in the local associative fabric. With a few rare exceptions, the multiplication of 
these devices  does not fundamentally call into question local power and its structures. Nor  6 does it reach the new levels of local power that ha ve developed over the last two decades, 
by grouping together smaller political units, whether at the regional level or within large 
metropolises and their areas of influence. More broadly, the institutions of non -
representative local democracy are failing to federate and build collective power on a scale 
that would make it possible to counteract not only the power of States but also that of 
macroeconomic actors (Harvey, 2012).  
It is thus possible to interpret the ongoing renewal of the political imagina ries of small scales 
and the protest investment in the local level by several social movements as a response to 
the cycle of democratization that is underway in several countries at th is very  local level. The 
current moment therefore questions the complex dia lectic of protest and participation, the 
relationship between a "wild" (or "insurgent") democracy and a "domesticated" democracy 
(Holston, 2009; Neveu, 2011; Young, 2003). We can schematically oppose three theses 
(Bobbio, Melé, 2015). The first stipulates that participatory devices  calm conflicts and 
ultimately increase the common good. The second thesis states, on the contrary, that 
participatory devices  tend to exacerbate conflicts and produce disorder. The third thesis, 
which dominates French research, s tates that participation tends to neutralize conflicts and 
maintain power structures. Current empirical investigations tend to complicate this picture 
by emphasizing that the effect of the relationship between participation and protest 
depends, among other  factors, on the degree of organization of the protagonists, the 
effective place accorded to them in participatory procedures and the field of public action 
concerned by their discussions. In short, participation and conflict are more intertwined than 
is commonly believed and contribute, in different ways, to a local "debating" of public 
projects and to an intensification of politics in these arenas: in other words, to a re -
politicization of local issues.  
In recent years, several transnational networks, ori ginating from local public authorities, 
have been formed around the issue of local democracy (Barber, 2013). This is the case of the 
United Cities and Local Governments, the Fearless Cities network, built from the city of 
Barcelona, and which brings togeth er cities where experiments to deepen municipal 
democracy are taking place. At the same time, local mobilizations are also being structured 
and professionalized on a transnational scale, as shown by the activity of the Federation of 
Intentional Communities  (FIC), the American network Symbiosis, which brings together 
communalist experiences, platforms such as Commonspolis, which promotes libertarian 
municipalism, etc. The relocation of part of the citizens' commitments and protest politics is 
therefore accom panied by the formation of translocal networks  in which local communities 
enter into direct or indirect relationships across regional and national borders. Via 
Campesina, Human Rights Cities, Cities4Peace represent some of these  translocal networks 
among o thers that have been influential in recent years.  There is no opposition between the 
small and large scales of politics, between the local and the global. On the contrary, the 
extension of local and transnational contestations seems to be increasingly join t.   
* 
This parallel development of the local and the global can  also be seen in the rise of feminist 
and environmental movements in recent years. Whether local or transnational, current 
mobilizations are increasingly concerned with the "sphere of reproduction": all the activities 
that work, on a daily basis and from genera tion to generation, to reconstitute the conditions 
of production relationships, in particular the reconstitution of human life and the labour 
force. This includes food, housing, domestic work, health and care services, social work,  7 education, child and eld er care, maintenance of the natural and urban environment and 
many other goods and services , etc . As these activities are neglected or mistreated by neo -
liberal States and current capitalism, they are increasingly invested by civil society 
associations, fo undations and cooperatives. The challenge of small -scale political 
engage ment is to organize collectively and jointly, on a local and, sometimes , non -market 
basis, a set of activities that are being privatized or disappearing.  
All the developments that ha ve just been mentioned are certainly fragile, heterogeneous 
and sometimes contradictory. They have only just given substance to the hypothesis that has 
just been proposed and that needs to be tested further: that of a democratic revolution at 
the small pol itical levels  by developing a whole field of forces, coming from the public 
authorities as well as from civil society, around local issues. A whole effort to objectivize and 
aggregate the various experiences of small -scale democracy could be undertaken on the 
basis of some of the avenues suggested here (Denters, 2014; Nabatchi, Bingham, 2014).  
Even at the end of such a survey, the return of small scales may not finally take place. But we 
are betting that the question of the relevant scale of emancipatory p olicies (Keil, Mahon, 
2009), which is certainly not new, will certainly remain at the heart of the transformative 
agenda of the twenty -first century.  
 
References  
ANDREW, C., GOLDSMITH, M., 1998. «  From Local Government to Local Governance: And Beyond?  », 
International Political Science Review , 19, 2  : 101 -117.  
BACQUÉ, M. -H., REY, H., SINTOMER, Y. (eds.), 2005. Gestion de proximité et démocratie participative, 
une perspective comparative , Paris, La Découverte, 2005.  
BALDERSHEIM, H., STAHLBERG, K. (eds.), 19 94. Towards the Self -Regulating Municipality: Free 
Commune and Administrative Modernization in Scandinavia , Aldershot: Ashgate.  
BARBER, B., 2013. If Mayors Ruled the World: Dysfunctional Nations, Rising Cities , New Haven (Ct.), 
Yale University Press.  
BOBB IO, L., MELÉ, P., 2015. «  Les relations paradoxales entre conflit et participation  », Participations , 
13: 7 -33. 
BOOKCHIN, M., 1995. «  Libertarian Municipalism: The New Municipal Agenda  », From Urbanization 
to Cities: Toward a New Politics of Citizenship , London, Cassell.  
BOOKCHIN, M., 2000. «  Thoughts on Libertarian Municipalism  », Left Green Perspectives , 41, Janua ry 
2000.  
BONY, Y. et al. (eds.), 2011. Espaces de vie, espaces enjeux. Entre investissements ordinaires et 
mobilisations politiques , Rennes, Presses universitaires de Rennes.  
COLON, J. M., HERSON -FORD, M., HORVATH, K., MARTINDALE, D., PORGES, M., 2017. «  Community, 
Democracy and Mutual Aid: Toward Dual Power and Beyond  », The Next System Project . 
DECHEZELLES S., OLIVE, M. (eds.), 2019. Politisation du proche. Les lieux familiers comme espaces de 
mobilisation , Rennes, Presses universitaires de Rennes.  
DENTER S, B. et al., 2014. Size and Local Democracy , Cheltenham, Edwar Elgar.  
DIRL IK, A., 2011. «  Globalization, Indigenism, Social Movements, and the Politics of Place  », Localities , 
1: 47 -90.  8 FELDMAN, B., HERSON -HORD, M., «  Corporate Power and Local Democracy: Challenges, 
Opportunities and Strategies  », Journal of World -Systems Research , vol. 25, 1: 49 -58. 
GOURGUES, G. 2023. Les politiques de démocratie participative , Grenoble, Presses Universi taires de 
Grenoble.  
HARVEY, D., 2012. Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution , New York, Verso.  
HOLSTON, J., 2009. «  Insurgent Citizenship in an Era of Global Urban Peripheries  », City and Society , 
vol. 21, 2: 245 -267.  
JEANPIERRE, L., 2019. In Girum. Les leçons politiques des ronds -points , Paris, La Découverte.  
KEIL, R., MAHON, R., 2009. Leviathan Undone? Towards a Political Economy of Scale , 
Vancouver/Toronto, UBC Press.  
LADNER, A. et al., 2019. Patterns of Local Autonomy in Europe , Basingstoke, Palgrave -
MacMillan/Cham.  
LALLEMENT, M., 2019. Un désir d’égalité. Vivre et travailler dans des communautés utopiques , Paris, 
Le Seuil.  
NEVEU, C., 2011. « Démocratie participative et mouvements sociaux  : entre domestication et 
ensauvage ment  ? », Participations , 1, 1  : 186 -209.  
LE BART, C., LEFEBVRE, R. (eds.), 2005. La proximité en politique. Usages, rhétoriques, pratiques , 
Rennes, Presses universitaires de Rennes.  
LOUGHLIN, J., HENDRIKS, F., LIDSTRÖM, A., 2011. Oxford Handbook of Local and Regional Democracy 
in Europe , Oxford, Oxford University Press.  
MANSKI, B., SMITH, J., 2019. «  The Dynamics and Terrains of Local Democracy and Corporate Power 
in the 21st Century  », Journal of World -Systems Research , vol. 25, 1: 6 -14. 
MAUVAISE TROUPE C OLLECTIVE, 2018. The Zad and NoTAV. Territorial Struggles and The Making of a 
New Political Intelligence , London, Verso.  
NABATCHI, T., BLOMGREN AMSLER, L., 2014. «  Direct Public Engagement in Local Government  », 
American Review of Public Administration , 44: 63 -88.  
ORTIZ, I., BURKE, S., BERRADA, M., CORTES, H., 2013, «  World Protests 2006 -2013  », Initiative for 
Policy Dialog ue and Friedrich -Ebert Stiftung New York Working Paper Series , Friedrich -Ebert Stiftung 
New York.  
SELLERS, J., LIDSTROM, A., BAE, Yooil, 2020. Multilevel Democracy. How Local Institutions and Civil 
Society Shape the Modern State , Cambridge, Cambridge Unive rsity Press.  
SINTOMER, Y., 2007. Le pouvoir au peuple  : jurys citoyens, tirage au sort et démocratie participative , 
Paris, La Découverte.  
SITRIN, M., AZZELLINI, D., 2014. They Can’t Represent Us! Reinventing Democracy from Greece to 
Occupy , London, Verso.  
SOLNIT, R., 2009. A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities Built in Disaster , New York, 
Penguin Books.  
TALPIN, J., 2013. « La démocratie participative marginalisée par le pouvoir local », Savoir/Agir , 25: 
23-30. 
TEUNE, H., 1995. «  Local Government and Democratic Political Development  », Annals of the 
American Academy of  Political  and Social Science , 540  :11-23. 
TILLY, C., 1986. The Contentious French , Cambridge, Harvard University Press.   9 UNITED CITIES AND LOCAL GO VERNMENTS, 2009. Decentralization and Local Democracy in the 
World. First Global Report by United Cities and Local Governments 2008 , Washington DC, United 
Cities and Local Governments.  
VAN DETH, J. W., MONTERO, J. R., WESTHOLM, A. (eds.), 2008. Citizenship  and Involvement  
in European Democracies . A Comparative Analysis , London,  Routledge . 
VOSS, K., WILLIAMS, M., 2012. «  The Local in the Global: Rethinking Social Movements in the New 
Millennium  », Democratization , 19, 2: 352 –377.  
YOUNG, I. M., 2003. «  Activist Challenges to Deliberative Democracy  », in J. S. Fishkin, P. Laslett 
(eds.), Debating Deliberative Democracy , Lond on, Blackwell: 102 -121.  